# Abdul's Wiki — Darul Ulum Montreal Platform

> Living documentation. Update this file whenever architecture or major features change.

---

## What This App Is

**Darul Ulum Montreal** is a web-based management platform for an Islamic Quran school (madrassah) in Montreal. It serves three distinct user types: **Admins**, **Teachers**, and **Parents**.

The core purpose: track every student's Quran memorization journey, monitor attendance, enable teacher-parent communication, and give admins full visibility into school performance.

**Live URL:** https://app.daralulummontreal.com/

---

## Tech Stack

| Layer | Technology |
|---|---|
| Frontend | React 18 + Vite + TypeScript |
| UI Components | shadcn/ui + Radix UI primitives |
| Styling | TailwindCSS 3.4 |
| State / Data | TanStack React Query 5 |
| Forms | React Hook Form + Zod |
| Routing | React Router 6 |
| Charts | Recharts |
| Animation | Framer Motion |
| Backend | Supabase (Postgres + Auth + Storage + Edge Functions) |
| Email | Resend API (via Supabase Edge Functions) |
| Calendar | FullCalendar |

---

## User Roles

### Admin
- Full access to everything
- Can proxy into any teacher or parent account ("View As") — amber banner shows during proxy, Exit button restores admin view; eye icon on Teachers page and Parent Accounts page
- Views live analytics dashboard (KPIs, at-risk students, alerts)
- Manages teacher accounts, parent accounts, student roster
- Can import students via CSV bulk upload
- Views activity feed
- Can manually invoke email notifications
- Routes to `/dashboard` → teacher portal view with admin flag

### Teacher
- Logs student Quran progress (Dhor Book: surah, juz, ayat, quality, notes)
- Takes attendance (bulk, per class/session)
- Views at-risk students and performance analytics
- Sends messages to parents (with email notification via Resend)
- Creates and grades assignments
- Views their class schedule
- Routes to `/dashboard` → teacher portal

### Parent
- Views child's Quran progress, attendance history
- Views and filters assignments/submissions
- Messages the teacher (with email notification)
- If linked to multiple children, uses child selector
- Routes to `/parent`

---

## Page Map

### Shared
- `/auth` — Login/signup
- `/reset-password` — Password reset

### Admin Sub-pages (under `/admin`)
- `/admin/parent-accounts` — Manage parent accounts
- `/admin/bulk-student-import` — CSV student import
- `/admin/teacher-schedules` — View teacher schedules
- `/admin/setup` — First-time setup wizard
- `/admin/roles` — Manual role assignment

### Main App (protected, under `DashboardLayout`)
- `/dashboard` — Role-based hub (Teacher Portal or Admin Portal)
- `/parent` — Parent dashboard
- `/parent/progress` — Child's Quran progress
- `/parent/academics` — Assignments with status filtering
- `/parent/attendance` — Attendance history
- `/parent/messages` — Teacher messaging
- `/students` — Student roster
- `/students/:id` — Individual student profile
- `/teachers` — Teacher roster
- `/classes` — Class management
- `/progress-book` — Dhor book entry (teacher)
- `/attendance` — Bulk attendance form (teacher)
- `/messages` — Teacher messaging
- `/schedule` — Teacher schedule
- `/teacher-accounts` — Manage teacher accounts (admin)
- `/add-parent` — Link parent to student (teacher)
- `/settings` — System settings
- `/preferences` — User preferences
- `/activity` — Activity feed (admin)
- `/calendar` — School calendar (events, holidays, PD days) — all roles

### Dev-only (gated)
- `/dev/seeder`, `/dev/create-demo`, `/dev/create-teacher-profile`, etc.

---

## Data Architecture

### Key Supabase Tables
| Table | Purpose |
|---|---|
| `profiles` | User profiles (all roles) — name, role, email, subject, location |
| `students` | Student records — name, status, class_ids, madrassah_id |
| `classes` | Class records — name, teacher_ids, current_students |
| `progress` | Quran progress entries — surah, juz, ayat, quality, notes |
| `attendance` | Attendance records — date, status, session, reason |
| `teacher_assignments` | Assignments — title, due_date, status, student_ids |
| `messages` | In-app messages — sender_id, recipient_id, message, read |
| `parents` | Parent records — student_ids link |
| `parent_children` | Parent→student linkage (legacy/fallback) |
| `notifications` | In-app notification queue; also used for overdue-email de-duplication (assignment_id + recipient_id + date) |
| `analytics_metrics` | Pre-aggregated analytics data |
| `teacher_tasks` | Tasks assigned by admin to teachers — priority (low/medium/high/urgent), status (pending/in_progress/done), due_date, notes |
| `announcements` | Class announcements from teachers — title, message, class_id, sent_to_count |
| `absence_requests` | Teacher absence requests — date range, reason, status (pending/approved/rejected), admin_note, reviewed_by |
| `school_events` | Calendar events — title, event_type, start_date, end_date, color, audience (all/teachers/parents) |

### Row Level Security
All tables have RLS policies. Teachers see only their students. Parents see only their children's data. Admins have full access.

---

## Email System

All emails go through **Resend** via Supabase Edge Functions:

| Function | When it fires |
|---|---|
| `send-teacher-message` | Teacher or parent sends an in-app message |
| `attendance-absence-email` | Student marked absent (runs every 5 min via pg_cron); `verify_jwt = false` |
| `daily-progress-email` | Daily summary to parents — auto-fires at **4:00pm EDT** via pg_cron (`0 20 * * *`); `verify_jwt = false`; sends Quran progress + assignment updates per student; admin summary email also sent |
| `send-parent-welcome-emails` | When a parent account is created |
| `admin-send-email` | Admin manual email blast |
| `send-late-arrival-alert` | When a student is marked late (POST `{ student_id, date, time }`) |
| `send-assignment-notification` | When a new assignment is created — notifies linked parents (POST `{ assignment_id, type }`) |
| `send-assignment-graded` | When a teacher grades an assignment (POST `{ assignment_id }`) — emails all linked parents |
| `send-assignment-overdue` | Daily at 08:00 UTC via pg_cron — scans overdue ungraded assignments, emails parents; de-duped via `notifications` table |
| `send-enrollment-confirmation` | When a new student is added (POST `{ student_id }`) — emails all admin accounts |
| `send-class-announcement` | When teacher broadcasts a class announcement (POST `{ announcement_id }`) — emails all class parents, updates `sent_to_count` |

Required env secrets: `RESEND_API_KEY`, `RESEND_FROM_EMAIL`, `APP_URL`, `LOGO_URL`

---

## Component Architecture

```
src/
├── pages/               # Top-level route components
│   ├── admin/           # Admin-specific pages
│   ├── dev/             # Dev-only tools (gated)
│   └── *.tsx            # Auth, Dashboard, Parent, Teacher pages
├── components/
│   ├── layouts/         # DashboardLayout, Sidebar, SidebarNav, SidebarUser
│   ├── analytics/       # EmptyState (shared empty state component)
│   ├── attendance/      # Attendance form, table, watchlist, heatmap components
│   ├── dhor-book/       # Quran progress recording (DhorBook, ClassroomRecords, etc.)
│   ├── teacher-portal/  # Full teacher dashboard (tabs, students, assignments, grading)
│   ├── onboarding/      # OnboardingModal (first login), DailyPromptModal (once/day)
│   ├── parent/          # ChildSelector, ParentMessages
│   ├── dashboard/       # DashboardStats, StatsCard, WeeklySchedule
│   ├── shared/          # FloatingDailyEmailButton, PageHelpBanner
│   ├── admin/           # Admin messaging, reports, settings, account management
│   ├── students/        # Student list, dialog, form
│   ├── teachers/        # Teacher list, dialog
│   ├── classes/         # Class management
│   └── ui/              # shadcn/ui wrapper components
├── hooks/               # Custom React hooks (auth, RBAC, data fetching, analytics)
├── services/analytics/  # KPI calculation, alert engine, aggregation jobs
├── contexts/            # AuthContext, I18nContext
├── types/               # TypeScript interfaces
├── utils/               # Helper functions (Quran math, CSV, role checks)
├── config/              # Navigation definitions
├── i18n/                # Translation strings
├── styles/              # Global CSS (theme, animations, components)
└── integrations/supabase/ # Client setup and generated types
```

---

## Attendance System

The attendance page is the primary monitoring surface. Key features:

- **Roll Call tab** — `AttendanceForm` selects class + date, marks status per student (present, absent, late, sick, excused, early_departure). Cutoff time enforced server-side.
- **Watchlist tab** — queries last 30 days, surfaces students with 2+ absences with consecutive-day streak badge and last-seen date.
- **Heatmap tab** — 30-day grid of school-wide daily attendance rate. Color bands: ≥90% green, 75–89% light green, 60–74% amber, <60% red.
- **Records tab** — `AttendanceTable` shows full attendance log with filters.
- **Multi-day Absence** — `LongTermAbsenceModal` creates one excused record per weekday in a date range.

**At-risk (teacher portal only):**
`useTeacherStudentMetrics` flags students with low attendance rate or no progress in 7+ days. Shown in `DashboardOverview` alert banner.

---

## Navigation Config

`src/config/navigation.ts` defines nav items per role:
- **adminNavItems** — 11 items (Dashboard, Analytics, Students, Teachers, Classes, ProgressBook, Attendance, ParentAccounts, BulkImport, TeacherSchedules, Settings)
- **teacherNavItems** — 8 items (filtered by capability: attendance, progress, assignments)
- **parentNavItems** — 6 items (ParentDashboard, AddParent, Messages, QuranProgress, Academics, Attendance)

---

## I18n

Custom I18n context (not react-i18next). Translation keys in `src/i18n/translations.ts`. Falls back to key string if translation missing. Language stored in localStorage.

---

## Known Gotchas & Lessons Learned

> Read this before touching any green banner/hero or deletion logic.

### 1. CSS Theme overrides `text-white` — ALWAYS use inline styles on green banners
`.admin-theme` and `.teacher-theme` global CSS rules override Tailwind color classes including `text-white`. **Rule: any text inside a green gradient hero/banner MUST use `style={{ color: "#ffffff" }}`**. Tailwind classes alone will render as dark theme colors.
Additionally, `<a>` link elements are styled by the theme with high specificity — even inline `style={{ color }}` can lose on anchor tags. **Replace `<a href="tel:">` / `<a href="mailto:">` with `<button onClick={() => window.open(...)}>` inside hero banners.**

### 2. Dark overlays on dark backgrounds = invisible
`bg-black/20` on a dark green background (#052e16) is basically invisible. For pill badges, avatars, and buttons on any dark green hero, use `bg-white/20` (light-on-dark) not `bg-black/20` (dark-on-dark).

### 3. Student profile hero gradient must match dashboard
Dashboard uses `linear-gradient(135deg, #052e16 0%, #14532d 50%, #166534 100%)`. The student profile was using a lighter teal gradient (`#0f4c35→#0f766e`) which looked washed out. Always use the same dark gradient for consistency.

### 4. delete-teacher must clean classes.teacher_ids array
The `classes` table stores `teacher_ids` as a Postgres array. Deleting the profile row does NOT automatically remove the UUID from that array. The edge function must manually fetch all classes containing the teacher ID and filter it out before profile deletion, otherwise the teacher ghost-ID stays in classes.

### 5. git push always requires shallow-fetch workaround
The repo has a corrupt `refs/stash 2` object. Every push session requires:
```bash
git fetch --depth=1 origin main
git fetch --unshallow origin main
git merge origin/main --no-edit
git push origin main
```
Never use `git pull --rebase` or plain `git fetch` — they both fail with `fatal: bad object refs/stash 2`.

### 6. Release bot adds commits between every push
Between any two pushes, an automated release bot commits a `CHANGELOG.md` update to `origin/main`. Always merge before pushing or the push will be rejected. This is expected behavior — don't try to fix it.

---

## Change Log

| Date | Summary | See Also |
|---|---|---|
| 2026-05-07 (s4) | Communication templates: new Supabase table + RLS, 6 seeded Islamic templates, useCommunicationTemplates hook, /admin/communication-templates page (category pills, card grid, CRUD); admin edit users: TeacherEditDialog adds location field, ParentEditDialog (name/email/phone), pencil button in ParentAccounts | handoff.md |
| 2026-05-07 (s3) | Asana DUM App tasks: task checkmark right-aligned (ml-auto), admin password reset email button (TeacherAccountActions), admin "Attendance Today" card (unmarked students chip grid + Remind Teachers button), Students admin section-filter removed | handoff.md |
| 2026-05-07 (s2) | DB data corrections: fixed wrong guardian/address for 9 students (bulk enrichment copy-paste errors), activated AbdulQuawy (Muhammad Adekunle's brother), added 10 missing secondary contacts, deleted Jeanrismé family (2 students); final 113 students | handoff.md |
| 2026-05-07 | DB sync: deleted 8 ghost students, set 14 inactive, fixed section/gender for 32 male students, enriched 89 students with DOB/contacts/addresses from DUM Master Excel, inserted Jana Zabennagi (new active); final count 115 students | handoff.md |
| 2026-05-05 (s5) | Teacher deletion fixed — delete-teacher edge function rewritten to nuke all related rows (classes array, progress, comms, tasks, absences, announcements, attendance, profile, auth); redeployed live | handoff.md |
| 2026-05-05 (s4) | Student profile hero white text: 3 attempts needed — bg-black/20 invisible on dark bg → bg-white/20 still theme-overridden → inline style={{ color:'#fff' }} + replaced <a> with <button> to bypass link CSS; NewProgressEntry trigger styled white; gradient matched to dashboard (#052e16→#166534) | handoff.md |
| 2026-05-05 (s3) | Messages page full layout redesign (compose card, avatar rows, chat-bubble thread dialog); student profile hero text fully solid white (bg-black/20 badges, no opacity fades); stat card + tab label polish | handoff.md |
| 2026-05-05 (s2) | Student profile page complete redesign (hero gradient, stat cards, conditional chart, clean tabs); HubSpot-style contact popover (StudentContactPopover); per-student notes + action buttons in BulkAttendanceGrid | handoff.md |
| 2026-05-05 | Attendance grid → numbered vertical list (StudentGrid + BulkAttendanceGrid); daily-progress-email cron fixed (verify_jwt=false deployed, schedule 0 20 * * *, dead job removed); attendance-absence-email also fixed (verify_jwt=false) | handoff.md |
| 2026-05-03 | Secretary feedback: calendar audience (all/teachers/parents), upcoming events on teacher + parent dashboards, teacher location field, attendance vertical list, Sr. Salma null-crash fix; DB: profiles.location + school_events.audience columns | handoff.md |
| 2026-04-28 (s3) | Deployed 4 edge functions to live Supabase (send-assignment-graded, send-assignment-overdue, send-enrollment-confirmation, send-class-announcement); pg_cron daily overdue job scheduled at 08:00 UTC | handoff.md |
| 2026-04-28 (s2) | 6 features: assignment graded/overdue notifications, enrollment confirmation email, student status filter, task list (admin→teacher), class announcements broadcast, teacher absence request flow; teacher portal luxury overhaul (gradient banner, pill tabs, stat cards); 3 DB migrations applied | handoff.md |
| 2026-04-28 | Sortable table headers (Students, Teachers, Parent Accounts); attendance + parent-accounts tabs converted to pill buttons (fix blue underline); SidebarUser expanded dropdown navigation fix | handoff.md |
| 2026-04-27 (s4) | Admin proxy/impersonation feature (ProxyContext, eye button on teachers+parents, amber banner, useRBAC override); nav cleanup (section groups, Profile/Settings moved to user dropdown, trimmed teacher+parent nav) | handoff.md |
| 2026-04-27 (s3) | Full luxury UI redesign: sidebar pill active state + dark avatar + wordmark; tinted dashboard stat cards (green/red/amber) + 4xl KPI numbers + section header accents; icon page headers on Students/Teachers/Classes; colored avatar circles + icon action buttons in all tables; AdminPageShell gradient button fix | handoff.md |
| 2026-04-27 (s2) | Bug fix: green banner text now uses inline styles to defeat CSS theme specificity (`.admin-theme`/`.teacher-theme` were overriding `text-white`); all 4 green banner pages fixed | handoff.md |
| 2026-04-27 | 6 features: contact pop-up, CSV export, unexcused warnings, late arrivals alert, school calendar, assignment notifications; `school_events` table migration; 2 new edge functions | handoff.md |
| 2026-04-26 (s2) | Analytics removal; attendance redesign (watchlist + heatmap); DailyPromptModal; Settings toggle | handoff.md |
| 2026-04-26 | 5 DUM Application Feedback features (onboarding, admin dashboard, Health IEP, Staff HRIS, sick status); schedule seed | handoff.md |
| 2026-04-16 | Absence reasons, multi-day modal, student dossier, profile page | handoff.md |
| 2026-04-15 | Initial wiki creation; UI cleanup; debug log removal; real data for DashboardStats, TodayStudents, RecentActivity | handoff.md |
